Active Record Encryption [WIP] (#13)
bhumi1102/rails: guides/source/active_record_encryption.md

## Why Encrypt Data at the Application Level?

Encrypting specific attributes at the application-level adds an additional security layer. For example, if someone gains access to your application logs or database backup, the encrypted data remains unreadable. It also helps avoid accidental exposure of sensitive information in your application console or logs.

Most importantly, this feature lets you explicitly define what data is sensitive in your code. This enables precise access control throughout your application and any connected services. For example, you can use tools like [console1984](https://github.com/basecamp/console1984) to restrict decrypted data access in Rails consoles. You can also take advantage of automatic [parameter filtering](#filtering-params-named-as-encrypted-columns) for encrypted fields.

NOTE: Encryption does requires extra space because the encrypted value will be

> larger than the original value. This overhead is negligible at larger sizes. The

Author: updated to Active Record Encryption (here an in a few places that say "the library")

Once the keys are generated and stored, you can start using Active Record Encryption by declaring attributes to be encrypted.

### Declare Encrypted Attributes

The [`encrypts` method](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Encryption/EncryptableRecord.html#method-i-encrypts) defines attribute to be encrypted at the model level. These are regular Active Record attributes backed by a column with the same name.

```ruby
class Article < ApplicationRecord
  encrypts :title
end
```

Active Record Encryption library will transparently encrypt these attributes before saving them to the database and will decrypt them upon retrieval. For example,

```ruby
article = Article.create title: "Encrypt it all!"
article.title # => "Encrypt it all!"
```

However, in the Rails console, the executed SQL looks like this:

```sql
INSERT INTO `articles` (`title`) VALUES ('{\"p\":\"n7J0/ol+a7DRMeaE\",\"h\":{\"iv\":\"DXZMDWUKfp3bg/Yu\",\"at\":\"X1/YjMHbHD4talgF9dt61A==\"}}')
```

> 

Author: Sure. Added that it's storing the encrypted value.

### Querying Encrypted Data: Deterministic vs. Non-deterministic Encryption

> By default, Active Record Encryption is non-deterministic, which means that encrypting the same value with the same key twice will result in *different* encrypted values (aka ciphertexts). The non-deterministic approach improves security by making crypto-analysis of ciphertexts harder.  However, it makes querying the database impossible.

Reviewer: Do you think we could add an example to supplement your pretty great description.

```suggestion
However, it also means that querying encrypted values directly in the database is not possible. For example, you can’t use queries like WHERE title = "Encrypt it all!" on encrypted columns, because the same value encrypts differently each time and can’t be matched directly.
```

> If you need to able to query the encrypted `email` field on the `Author` model below, you can use deterministic encryption:

Reviewer: What do you think about using the same model from the example above to follow through in examples below? Or updating the model above to match the model below?

> If you need to able to query the encrypted `email` field on the `Author` model below, you can use deterministic encryption:

Reviewer: +1 on second suggestion

> If you need to able to query the encrypted `email` field on the `Author` model below, you can use deterministic encryption:

Reviewer: I know you've already explained non-deterministic above, but wondering if its worth putting a small description of deterministic in brackets. 

```suggestion
If you need to query the encrypted `email` field on the `Author` model below, you can use deterministic encryption (one that always produces the same output given the same input):
```

```ruby
class Author < ApplicationRecord
  encrypts :email, deterministic: true
end

# You can only query by email if using deterministic encryption.
Author.find_by_email("tolkien@email.com")
```

> The `deterministic:` option generates initialization vectors in a deterministic

Reviewer: I guess you describe deterministic here, I wonder if it could be explained earlier on, at the first mention

way, meaning it will produce the same encrypted output given the same input
value. This makes querying encrypted attributes possible, like the `email`
above.

The `:deterministic` option allows for querying by trading off lesser security.

> The data is still encrypted but the determinism makes crypto-analysis easier.

Reviewer: I feel like I was curious about how the deterministic option work, would it be useful to add a sentence about it?

For this reason, non-deterministic encryption is recommended for all data unless
you need to query by an attribute.

> NOTE: In non-deterministic mode, Active Record uses AES-GCM with a 256-bits key

Reviewer: Maybe a link to what AES-GCM is?

Reviewer: This seems like it addresses my question above about how deterministic and non-deterministic encryption works, but to be honest, I don't really understand what this NOTE means or implies.

Author: Updated the Note with links and clarified the high level point the note is making about the IV being random vs. not random.

and a random initialization vector. In deterministic mode, it also uses AES-GCM,
but the initialization vector is generated as an HMAC-SHA-256 digest of the key
and contents to encrypt.

> NOTE: You can disable deterministic encryption by omitting the

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is necessary? Deterministic encryption is not enabled by default in Active Record Encryption — non-deterministic encryption is. So saying "you can disable it" implies it's on by default

Author: Reworded this to: If you do not define a `deterministic_key`, then you have effectively disabled deterministic encryption.

`deterministic_key`.

## Basic Usage

### Ignoring Case

> You might need to ignore case when querying deterministically encrypted data. Two approaches make accomplishing this easier:

Reviewer: It might be useful to be more explicit about which are the two approaches.

You can use the `:downcase` option when declaring the encrypted attribute to downcase the content before encryption occurs.

```ruby
class Person
  encrypts :email_address, deterministic: true, downcase: true
end
```

When using `:downcase`, the original case is lost. In some situations, you might
want to ignore the case only when querying while also storing the original case.
For those situations, you can use the `:ignore_case` option. This requires you
to add a new column named `original_<column_name>` to store the content with the
case unchanged:

```ruby
class Label
  encrypts :name, deterministic: true, ignore_case: true # the content with the original case will be stored in the column `original_name`
end
```

### Serialized Attributes

> By default, Active Record Encryption will serialize values using the underlying type before encrypting them as long as the value is serializable as Strings. If the underlying type is not serializable as a String, you can use a custom [`message_serializer`](https://edgeapi.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Encryption/MessageSerializer.html):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Active Record Encryption will serialize values using the underlying type before encrypting them as long as the value is serializable as Strings. If the underlying type is not serializable as a String, for example, like the JSON below, you can use a custom [`message_serializer`](https://edgeapi.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Encryption/MessageSerializer.html):
```

```ruby
class Article < ApplicationRecord
  encrypts :metadata, message_serializer: SomeCustomMessageSerializer.new
end
```

Attributes with structured types using the [`serialized`](https://api.rubyonrails.org/v8.0.2/classes/ActiveRecord/AttributeMethods/Serialization/ClassMethods.html#method-i-serialize) method are supported with encryption as well. The `serialized` method is used when you have an attribute that needs to be saved to the database as a serialized object (using `YAML`, `JSON` or such), and retrieved by deserializing into the same object.

NOTE: When using serialized attributes for custom types, the declaration of the serialized attribute should go **before** the encryption declaration:

> ```ruby
> # CORRECT
> class Article < ApplicationRecord
>   serialize :title, type: Title
>   encrypts :title
> end
> 
> # INCORRECT
> class Article < ApplicationRecord
>   encrypts :title
>   serialize :title, type: Title
> end
> ```

Reviewer: Could this be simplified as:

```suggestion
```ruby
class Article < ApplicationRecord
  serialize :title, type: Title
  # serialized attributes are declared before encryption
  encrypts :title
end
```
```

### Unique Constraints With Encrypted Data

Unique constraints are only supported with deterministically encrypted data.

#### Unique Validations

In order to support unique validations, you'll need to enable extended queries. The default value for this configuration is false:

```ruby
# config/applicaiton.rb
config.active_record.encryption.extend_queries = true
```

Then, the uniqueness constraint can be specified normally, along with encryption:

```ruby
class Person
  validates :email_address, uniqueness: true
  encrypts :email_address, deterministic: true, downcase: true
end
```

The `extended_queries` configuration also allows combining encrypted and unencrypted data, and when configuring previous encryption schemes.

NOTE: If you want to ignore case, make sure to use `downcase` or `ignore_case` option in the `encrypts` declaration. Using the `case_sensitive` option in the validation won't work.

#### Unique Indexes

> In order to support unique indexes on deterministically encrypted columns, you need to make sure that their ciphertexts don't change.
> 
> One thing Rails does to help is that, by default, deterministic attributes will use the oldest available encryption scheme when multiple encryption schemes are configured.

Reviewer: This is a new topic to me, and so I was also trying to understand it better, and I don't feel like I completely understood what it meant. I tried to be more explicit to help myself understand it, but feel free to ignore if you think it's too much. 

```suggestion
To support unique indexes on deterministically encrypted columns, it’s important that the same plaintext value always produces the same ciphertext. This consistency is what makes indexing and querying possible.

Rails helps with this by ensuring that when you have multiple encryption schemes configured (for example, during key rotation), it will use the oldest available encryption scheme when encrypting deterministic attributes. This means it will stick to the same key and settings that were originally used, so the ciphertext remains stable.

By always using the oldest scheme for deterministic encryption, Rails ensures that encrypted values don’t unexpectedly change, which is essential for maintaining uniqueness constraints and allowing efficient lookups.
```

Author: Edited (and used some but not all of the above).

```ruby
class Person
  encrypts :email_address, deterministic: true
end
```

In order for unique indexes to work, you will have to ensure that the encryption properties for the underlying attributes don't change.

### Filtering Params Named as Encrypted Columns

> Encrypted columns are configured to be automatically [filtered](configuring.html#config-filter-parameters) in Rails logs. In case you need to disable filtering of encrypted parameters, you can use the following configuration:

Author: Updated!

#### Action Text Fixtures

To encrypt Action Text fixtures, you can place them in `fixtures/action_text/encrypted_rich_texts.yml`.

### Encoding

When encrypting strings non-deterministically, their original encoding is preserved automatically.

> For deterministic encryption, Rails stores the string encoding alongside the ciphertext. However, to ensure consistent encryption output—especially for querying or enforcing uniqueness—the library forces UTF-8 encoding by default. This avoids producing different ciphertexts for identical strings with different encodings.

Reviewer: Nitpick, I think commas help with readability, but feel free to ignore if you disagree.

```suggestion
For deterministic encryption, Rails stores the string encoding alongside the ciphertext. However, to ensure consistent encryption output, especially for querying or enforcing uniqueness, the library forces UTF-8 encoding by default. This avoids producing different ciphertexts for identical strings with different encodings.
```

You can customize this behavior. To change the default forced encoding:

```ruby
config.active_record.encryption.forced_encoding_for_deterministic_encryption = Encoding::US_ASCII
```

To disable forced encoding and preserve the original encoding in all cases:

```ruby
config.active_record.encryption.forced_encoding_for_deterministic_encryption = nil
```

### Compression

The library compresses encrypted payloads by default. This can save up to 30% of the storage space for larger payloads.

You can disable compression by setting `compress` option when encrypting attributes:

```ruby
class Article < ApplicationRecord
  encrypts :content, compress: false
end
```

> You can also configure the algorithm used for the compression. The default compressor is `Zlib`. You can implement your own compressor by creating a class or module that responds to `deflate` and `inflate` methods. For example:

Reviewer: Maybe a link to Zlib?

```ruby
require "zstd-ruby"

module ZstdCompressor
  def self.deflate(data)
    Zstd.compress(data)
  end

  def self.inflate(data)
    Zstd.decompress(data)
  end
end

class User
  encrypts :name, compressor: ZstdCompressor
end
```

You can also configure the desired compression method globally:

```ruby
config.active_record.encryption.compressor = ZstdCompressor
```

### Using the API

> ActiveRecord encryption is meant to be used declaratively, but there is also an API for debugging or advance use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ActiveRecord Encryption is meant to be used declaratively, but there is also an API for debugging or advanced use cases.
```

You can encrypt and decrypt all relevant attributes of an `article` model like this:

```ruby
article.encrypt # encrypt or re-encrypt all the encryptable attributes
article.decrypt # decrypt all the encryptable attributes
```

You can check whether a given attribute is encrypted:

```ruby
article.encrypted_attribute?(:title)
```

> You can read the `cipertext` for an attribute:

Reviewer: I haven't seen ciphertext in code blocks before this?

```ruby
article.ciphertext_for(:title)
```

## Migrating Existing Data

### Support for Unencrypted Data

To ease the transition from unencrypted to encrypted attributes in your Rails application, you can enable support for unencrypted data with:

```ruby
config.active_record.encryption.support_unencrypted_data = true
```

When enabled:

* Reading attributes that are still unencrypted will succeed without raising errors.

* Queries on deterministically encrypted attributes can match both encrypted and cleartext values, if you also enable `extended_queries`:

```ruby
config.active_record.encryption.extend_queries = true
```

This setup is intended only for migration periods during which both encrypted and unencrypted data need to coexist in your application. Both options default to `false`, which is the recommended long-term configuration to ensure data is fully encrypted and enforced.

### Support for Previous Encryption Schemes

> Changing encryption properties of attributes can break existing data. For example, imagine you want to make a deterministic attribute non-deterministic. If you simply change the declaration in the model, reading existing ciphertexts will fail because the encryption method is different now.

Reviewer: (nitpick):

```suggestion
Changing encryption properties of attributes can break existing data. For example, imagine you want to make a deterministic attribute non-deterministic. If you change the declaration in the model, reading existing ciphertexts will fail because the encryption method is different now.
```

> To support these situations, you can specify previous encryption schemes be use globally or on a per-attribute basis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support these situations, you can specify previous encryption schemes to be used globally or on a per-attribute basis.
```

Once you configure the previous scheme, the following will be supported:

* When reading encrypted data, Active Record Encryption will try previous encryption schemes if the current scheme doesn't work.

* When querying deterministic data, it will add ciphertexts using previous schemes so that queries work seamlessly with data encrypted with different schemes.

You need to enable `extended_queries` configuration for this to work:

```ruby
 `config.active_record.encryption.extend_queries = true` to enable this.
```

Next, let's see how to configure previous encryption schemes.

#### Global Previous Encryption Schemes

> You can add previous encryption schemes by adding them as a list of properties using the `previous` config property in your `application.rb`:

Reviewer: Would it be useful to say why we'd want to do this?

Author: Hm...this sub-section is preceded by exactly that explanation (meaning the *why* is explained first, this is suppose to be just the *how*):

Changing encryption properties of attributes can break existing data. For example, imagine you want to make a deterministic attribute non-deterministic. If you change the declaration in the model, reading existing ciphertexts will fail because the encryption method is different now.

**To support these situations, you can specify previous encryption schemes to be used globally or on a per-attribute basis.**

Once you configure the previous scheme, the following will be supported:

```ruby
config.active_record.encryption.previous = [ { key_provider: MyOldKeyProvider.new } ]
```

#### Per-attribute Previous Encryption Schemes

> Use `previous`option when declaring the encrypted attribute:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `previous` option when declaring the encrypted attribute:
```

```ruby
class Article
  encrypts :title, deterministic: true, previous: { deterministic: false }
end
```

#### Encryption Schemes and Determinism

With deterministic encryption, you typically want ciphertexts to remain constant. So when changing encryption schemes, non-deterministic and deterministic encryption behave differently.

* With **non-deterministic encryption**, new information will always be encrypted with the *newest* (current) encryption scheme.

* With **deterministic encryption**, new information will be encrypted with the *oldest* encryption scheme by default.

> It is possible to change this behavior for deterministic encryption to use the *newest* encryption scheme for encrypting new data like this:

Reviewer: A question that comes to mind is, why would we want to do this?

Author: Yeah, I thought of the same question when writing this. My guess is if you don't care about the old encrypted data anymore and want to make a "hard switch" over to the new scheme 🤷‍♀️ But don't want to speculate in the guide so leaving it as is 😊

```ruby
class Article
  encrypts :title, deterministic: { fixed: false }
end
```

## Encryption Contexts

An encryption context defines the encryption components that are used in a given moment. There is a default encryption context based on your global configuration, but you can also configure a custom context for a given attribute or when running a specific block of code.

> NOTE: Encryption contexts are a flexible but advanced configuration mechanism. Most users should not have to care about them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Encryption contexts are a flexible but advanced configuration mechanism. Most users would not need to use them.
```

* `key_provider`: serves encryption and decryption keys.
* `message_serializer`: serializes and deserializes encrypted payloads.

WARNING: If you decide to build your own `message_serializer`, it's important to use safe mechanisms that can't deserialize arbitrary objects. A commonly supported scenario is encrypting existing unencrypted data. An attacker can leverage this to enter a tampered payload before encryption takes place and perform RCE attacks. This means custom serializers should avoid `Marshal`, `YAML.load` (use `YAML.safe_load`  instead), or `JSON.load` (use `JSON.parse` instead).

### Built-In Encryption Context

The global encryption context is the one used by default and is configured with other configuration properties in your `application.rb` or environment config files.

```ruby
config.active_record.encryption.key_provider = ActiveRecord::Encryption::EnvelopeEncryptionKeyProvider.new
config.active_record.encryption.encryptor = MyEncryptor.new
```

You can use [`with_encryption_context`](`https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Encryption/Contexts.html#method-i-with_encryption_context`) to override any of the properties of the encryption context.

> ### Encryption Context With a Block of Code

Reviewer 2: Prepositions can be lowercase as well. https://guides.rubyonrails.org/ruby_on_rails_guides_guidelines.html#headings
```suggestion
### Encryption Context with a Block of Code
```

You can set an encryption context for a given block of code using `with_encryption_context`:

```ruby
ActiveRecord::Encryption.with_encryption_context(encryptor: ActiveRecord::Encryption::NullEncryptor.new) do
  # ...
end
```

### Per-attribute Encryption Contexts

You can override encryption context configuration by passing options in the attribute declaration:

```ruby
class Attribute
  encrypts :title, encryptor: MyAttributeEncryptor.new
end
```

### Encryption Context to Disable Encryption

> You can run code without encryption:

Reviewer: Why would we want to do this?

#### DerivedSecretKeyProvider

> The [`DerivedSecretKeyProvider`](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Encryption/DerivedSecretKeyProvider.html) key provider serves keys derived from the provided passwords using PBKDF2. This is the key provider configured by default.

Reviewer 2: For the next key providers only the provider name is used ("XKeyProvider" instead of "XKeyPRovider key provider"):
```suggestion
The [`DerivedSecretKeyProvider`](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Encryption/DerivedSecretKeyProvider.html) serves keys derived from the provided passwords using PBKDF2. This is the key provider configured by default.
```

#### EnvelopeEncryptionKeyProvider

> The [`EnvelopeEncryptionKeyProvider`](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Encryption/EnvelopeEncryptionKeyProvider.html) implements a simple [envelope encryption](https://cloud.google.com/kms/docs/envelope-encryption) strategy, where the data is encrypted with a key, which in turn is also encrypted.

Reviewer 2: Maybe link to Wikipedia instead of a commercial party?
```suggestion
The [`EnvelopeEncryptionKeyProvider`](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Encryption/EnvelopeEncryptionKeyProvider.html) implements a simple [envelope encryption](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hybrid_cryptosystem#Envelope_encryption) strategy, where the data is encrypted with a key, which in turn is also encrypted.
```

  key_derivation_salt: a3226b97b3b2f8372d1fc6d497a0c0d3
```

> This enables key rotation workflow where you keep a short list of keys by adding new keys, re-encrypting content, and deleting old keys.

Reviewer: Why would you want to have a key rotation workflow?

Author: For this one, there is an explanation. I added this (further up):
The reason to rotate keys may be as part of your organization's security policy or if you suspect a key may be compromised.
